New post on agentic AI patterns (#2458)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2025-11-12-agentic-ai-patterns.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Agentic AI Patterns: one size does not fit all'
date: 2025-11-12T00:00:00Z
tags: ai llm agents
synopsis: 'Agentic AI Patterns: one size does not fit all'
author: mariofusco
---
:imagesdir: /assets/images/posts/agentic

In the first months of 2025 I published a three-part blog post series on agentic AI with Quarkus and its LangChain4j extension where I first https://quarkus.io/blog/agentic-ai-with-quarkus/[introduced agentic AI and workflow patterns], then explored https://quarkus.io/blog/agentic-ai-with-quarkus-p2/[purely AI orchestrated agentic patterns], and finally examined the https://quarkus.io/blog/agentic-ai-with-quarkus-p3/[differences between these two approaches] with a practical example, trying to put in evidence their pros and cons.

> Only a handful of months are passed since those articles, but in the meantime the AI ecosystem, and the possibilities it enables, evolved at an incredible speed, and I'm trying hard to keep up with all the novelties and changes. In fact the initial experiments that I discussed in that series seem now to come from a different geological era, even though they served me as an important starting point to explore the agentic AI landscape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only a handful of months have passed since those articles, but in the meantime the AI ecosystem, and the possibilities it enables, have evolved at an incredible speed, and I'm trying hard to keep up with all the novelties and changes. In fact the initial experiments that I discussed in that series seem now to come from a different geological era, even though they served me as an important starting point to explore the agentic AI landscape.
```

As usual at Devoxx, even more important than attending the uncountable talks on agentic AI, was the opportunity to meet so many people working in this field, exchanging ideas and sharing experiences, challenges, and solutions.

We learned a lot from these interactions, and returned to home with only one clear thought: we will never find an ultimate agent orchestrator pattern, not only because this is not our domain of expertise, but mostly because such a thing does not exist. The variety and complexity of tasks that can be required to an agentic system implies that there cannot be a pattern that works in all situations, a one-size-fits-all solution for agentic AI orchestration.

> In fact, there is a large spectrum of agentic patterns, ranging from reliable but rigid workflows, where agents control flow follows predetermined code paths, to flexible but unpredictable pure agentic orchestration, where LLMs autonomously decide the sequence of actions to be taken, maintaining control over how they execute tasks, and everything in between. In particular this "in between" space could represent the most interesting one, as it allows to balance reliability and flexibility, and considering the difficulties in better identifying it, why at least not giving to users the possibility to shape it in the way they need?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In reality, there is a broad spectrum of agentic patterns, ranging from reliable and deterministic yet rigid workflows, where agents follow predefined code and flow paths, to flexible yet unpredictable pure agentic orchestrations, where LLMs autonomously determine the sequence of actions and maintain control over task execution. Between these two extremes lies what might be the most interesting space: one that balances reliability and flexibility. And since precisely defining that middle ground is challenging, why not give users the ability to shape it according to their specific needs?
```

The other important point that deserves to be considered is that not only this new architecture gives a chance to users to implement their own agentic patterns, but it also allows to easily combine them with any other pattern, either offered by LangChain4j or implemented by the users themselves. In fact, since all the patterns are now defined in terms of a `Planner`, it is possible to use any pattern as a subagent of any other pattern, thus opening the door to an infinite variety of combinations, as the next example is intended to demonstrate.

== Mixing multiple agentic patterns

One of the examples used in the pull request mentioned above to illustrate this new architecture and how to create your own custom agentic pattern through it, is a goal oriented strategy determining the sequence of agents to be invoked in order to perform a specific complex task.

> More in detail, in order to put this approach in practice, not only the whole agentic system needs to define a final goal, but also each subagent needs to declare its own preconditions, required to be able to perform its task, and postconditions, that is the outcomes that it guarantees once its execution is completed. However, in agentic LangChain4j, all this information are implicitly already present in the agentic system, as those pre and postconditions are nothing else than the required inputs and produced outputs of each agent, and the final goal is simply the desired outputs of the whole agentic system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To put this approach into practice, the entire agentic system must define a final goal, and each subagent must declare its own preconditions, the requirements needed to perform its task,  and postconditions, which describe the outcomes guaranteed once execution is complete. However, in agentic LangChain4j, all this information is already implicitly available: the preconditions and postconditions correspond to each agent’s required inputs and produced outputs, while the final goal represents the desired outputs of the entire agentic system.
```
